# Customizing the Bootstraps

Latios.Core requires using an `ICustomBootstrap` in order to instantiate a
`LatiosWorld` as the default `World` instance. However, aside from this
requirement, the framework does not impose any restrictions on the
`ICustomBootstrap` implementation. It is possible to modify the generated
bootstrap from the templates or write a custom one from scratch. Additional
utilities are provided in the static class `BootstrapTools`.

A `LatiosWorld` populates itself with a `LatiosInitializationSystemGroup`, a
`LatiosSimulationSystemGroup`, and a `LatiosPresentationSystemGroup`. It further
populates `LatiosInitializationSystemGroup` with necessary framework systems.
For more details, see [LatiosWorld in detail](LatiosWorld%20in%20Detail.md).

## Customizing Features

Beginning with Latios Framework 0.5, many features come as optional components
which can be installed via the three bootstrap interfaces `ICustomBootstrap`,
`ICustomBakingBootstrap`, and `ICustomEditorBootstrap`. These installers inject
systems into their respective worlds and may also disable existing systems which
they intend to replace.

Installers can be found in the following static classes:

-   Runtime or Editor World
    -   Latios.CoreBootstrap
    -   Latios.Myri.MyriBootstrap
    -   Latios.Kinemation.KinemationBootstrap
-   Baking World
    -   Latios.Psyshock.Authoring.PsyshockConversionBootstrap
    -   Latios.Kinemation.Authoring.KinemationConversionBootstrap

`ICustomBakingBootstrap` also provides granular control for enabling and
disabling Baker types.

## Customizing Explicit System Ordering

When using the Explicit System Ordering workflow, you can further customize
which systems are injected at the top-level before top-down system ordering
takes over. Either before or after calling
`BootstrapTools.InjectRootSuperSystems()`, you may call one or more of these
useful functions:

-   `InjectUnitySystems()` - injects the systems from the type list which are
    Unity systems
-   `InjectSystemsFromNamespace()` - injects the systems from the type list
    whose namespace contains the passed-in string
    -   This is especially useful for third-party systems
-   `InjectSystem()` - injects a single system

## Customizing the PlayerLoop

Regardless of workflow, you may choose to customize the `PlayerLoop` to meet
your needs. While this is relatively straightforward with the recently added
`ScriptBehaviourUpdateOrder` API, some additional utilities are provided for
common use-cases.

-   `AddWorldToCurrentPlayerLoopWithFixedUpdate()` - The `FixedUpdate` in this
    context is the Unity Engineâ€™s `FixedUpdate` and not the Entities
    `FixedUpdate`.
-   `AddWorldToCurrentPlayerLoopWithDelayedSimulation()` - This runs the
    `SimulationSystemGroup` after rendering. This may be useful in removing a
    sync point or a `TransformSystemGroup` update depending on how your logic is
    structured.
