# ![](media/60f09d8726e0a13095c19b993f2fb88f.gif)

# Kinemation Animation and Rendering

Kinemation is an animation and rendering solution for Entities which aims to
tightly integrate gameplay and animation for large-scale worlds. Kinemation is
still under active development, and it has only laid down the foundations
towards what it aims to achieve. Yet those foundations are already usable in
projects. As of Unity DOTS 0.50 (when the first version was released), no
official Entities-based animation solution exists.

Check out the [Getting Started](Getting%20Started%20-%20Part%201.md) page!

## Features

### Out-of-the-Box Deformations

When you import a Game Object character prefab into your scene, that character
shows up with the pose it was exported with. If you then rotate the Game
Objects, the character deforms.

Well guess what?

When you convert that Game Object to an entity, it remains posed. And when you
rotate the converted entities, the character deforms. It works just like Game
Objects, except way faster!

But there’s more.

With Game Objects you can optimize the hierarchy. Not only can Kinemation
convert these hierarchies, but it will also convert them to its own optimized
hierarchy using the same exported bone settings. But there’s one big difference.
Kinemation provides direct access to the optimized hierarchy buffer, so that you
can always remain in complete control.

Kinemation is even smart enough to figure out what skinning algorithm your
shaders use. Whether you use Linear Blend Skinning, Compute Deform, or even
both, Kinemation will automatically use the correct algorithms to fulfill your
shaders’ needs.

And if you think all of that sounds amazing, this next one deserves its own
section!

### Vertex-Accurate Animation-Independent Culling

Classical Unity uses baked animation data of a character to figure out if it is
on screen. But when you start procedurally stretching bones outside the confines
of the baked animations, Unity might think your character is out of view when
its stretched out arms are right in front of the camera.

Kinemation doesn’t care how your character’s bones got where they are. It will
find a bounding box around all your character’s vertices and not much else. It
does this using a special precomputation step during conversion which maps
relationships between vertices and bones. From this, it only needs the bone
positions and a small table to find a suitable bounding box.

You don’t need to do anything. It works automatically using the full potential
of jobs and Burst.

### A Better Hybrid Renderer

A large amount of the Hybrid Renderer has been rewritten to better take
advantage of culling and to support far more characters in open worlds. Now,
chunks of entities that aren’t visible won’t upload data to the GPU. And the
skinning dispatcher will only allocate skinning buffers for the visible
entities, drastically reducing VRAM usage. Compute deform skinning now benefits
from LODs.

Both classical Unity and the unaltered Hybrid Renderer perform skinning
mesh-by-mesh (the Hybrid Renderer at least processes all instances of a mesh at
once). Kinemation handles all meshes for all skeletons at once using a special
compute shader. This removes resource stalls and allows the GPU to use all
available cores to perform skinning as fast as possible and move on to
rendering.

Because of this, Kinemation handles modular characters composed of multiple
meshes and materials incredibly well. Combining meshes no longer is an
optimization. Instead, focus on instancing character accessories across multiple
characters using shader graph properties to add variance.

A rewritten Hybrid Renderer might sound really scary, but Kinemation takes great
care to preserve existing workflows and behaviors where they make sense. It is
compatible with all existing shaders written for the Hybrid Renderer, and
material instance properties still work as expected.

But now, the culling process is completely open as public API. You can add your
own culling systems to alter the visibilities of entities without structural
changes or hacks. Or you can react to existing visibility information for
gameplay purposes. You can even mimic what Kinemation does and reserve some
heavy compute shader dispatches for only the entities that will be rendered.

### Easy Binding System

Character customization and weapon switching are common use cases that Unity’s
experimental DOTS animation package made extremely difficult. But Kinemation was
designed with these use cases in mind.

No longer do you have to copy magical bone arrays between Skinned Mesh
Renderers. Kinemation bakes transform hierarchy information as strings into Blob
Assets for skeletons and skinned meshes separately. Then at runtime, an
algorithm matches up the skeleton with the mesh to create the binding. This
usually just works without intervention, even for optimized hierarchies. But in
case you have trouble with naming conflicts, you can customize the mapping
strings yourself via optional authoring components.

Otherwise, all you have to do is point the mesh to the skeleton, bone of the
skeleton, or another mesh already bound to the skeleton. The rest happens
automatically in a reactive system.

### Immediate Low-Level (But Still Easy) Animation API

While Kinemation’s rendering stack mimic’s Myri’s philosophy where stuff just
works without code, animation takes the approach of Psyshock where nothing
happens except your code.

During conversion, you request which clips to convert and which Animator to bake
them for. You then get a blob asset containing that collection of clips. Then at
any time from any thread, with or without the skeleton at hand, you can sample
the clip. You can get the local transform of all bones, or just a single bone.
And what you do with that sampled transform is completely up to you. You can
blend it, discard it, perform some physics analysis on it, or you know, write it
to the bone entity’s transform components.

You remain in complete control over animation, and can fully customize it for
your project’s needs. KISS animation is trivial. And if you want to build an
advanced state machine or graph solution, Kinemation provides a great
foundational API and comes with the support of someone all too eager to answer
any questions you may have!

### AAA Animation Compression

Unity’s animation compression algorithm is not great. Usually, small sizes come
with great loss of accuracy to the original animation. That was never going to
work for my high-fidelity ambitions. And so, I went about researching possible
alternatives…

And I [found one](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=85uOa2m_kBc).

Meet [ACL](https://github.com/nfrechette/acl), a solution to animation
compression used by dozens of AAA titles and counting. The entire library is
written with a data-oriented mindset and API and takes full advantage of SIMD
hardware. It was trivial to [wrap a small part of this
library](https://github.com/Dreaming381/AclUnity) and call into it directly from
Burst.

ACL allows for specifying hard limits to quality loss, so that compression
artifacts are imperceptible. Those controls are now within your power whenever
you request an animation clip to convert into a blob asset. And if you choose to
use the defaults, you’ll get significantly higher quality than Unity’s defaults,
with even smaller compressed sizes.

Now if only Myri had something this good…

### Native Squash and Stretch

Squash and Stretch is one of the fundamental principles of animation. The most
natural way to express this using skeletal animation is to non-uniformly scale
bones. But that doesn’t work in game engines. The issue game engines have is
that the scaling causes child transforms to shear in undesirable ways.

Unity.Transforms provides a unique little component called `ParentScaleInverse`,
which can get rid of that unwanted shear. Kinemation is not only aware of it,
but can even compress animation clips with the component in mind.

That means real squash and stretch is finally here!

Animators, rejoice!

You still need to tell Kinemation which bones should not inherit scale from
their parents. But besides that, there’s nothing stopping you from pushing those
expressions to the extreme!

## Known Issues

-   Kinemation only supports desktop platforms. While the ACLUnity native plugin
    is expected to work across all platforms, I do not have the capability to
    compile and test for other platforms. If you would like to see Kinemation
    support your target platform, please reach out to me!
-   Kinemation supports a max hierarchy count of 341. It can go a little higher
    depending on which meshes are bound.
-   Occlusion Culling is not supported. The way it works assumes visibility
    indices have already been written. But that’s way slower than visibility
    masks, which Kinemation makes available. If this is going to be implemented,
    it is going to be implemented the right way.
-   Skinned Meshes don’t work in Live Link preview. This is because the default
    Hybrid Renderer still runs in this mode.
-   Hybrid Renderer stats don’t work. Kinemation will provide its own solution
    for this in a future release which will be more extensible and customizable.
-   Culling callbacks are slow on the main thread when there are lots of shadow
    passes. Those systems haven’t been optimized for the main thread yet.

## Near-Term Roadmap

-   Pose sampling into temporary buffers
    -   Significantly faster
    -   Requires local allocator
-   Blend Shapes
-   Dual Quaternion Skinning
-   Support for larger hierarchies
-   Stats and Troubleshooting Diagnostics
-   Import-time Binding Paths Baking
    -   Avoids issues where child bones are renamed in the hierarchy
-   IK Utilities
